Right down there or something.
Okay, that's good.
In the case of
an ornithological collection like Bradley Martin, there's no question that every effort should have been made to have kept it intact.
And if we'd been asked to make a proposal for the sale, that's what we would have proposed.
We would have proposed attempting to try and keep it intact.
And how would you have gone about doing that?
Offering it as a private...
we would have handled the high spot sale first bringing in a lot of money up front just as we did with Doheny One and then we would have held the bird collection until the end of the series
giving us time throughout the series to have tried to market it en bloc.
There was a strong certainty that we couldn't have sold it en bloc, that at least we would have been seen to have made the attempt.
We would have given it a chance.
Have you done that?
Is there any question for that?
We tried it later with Kistner, we failed, but an attempt was made.
And certainly there wasn't the flag.
There wouldn't have been the flag.
that was received by the Sotheby's, the Martin's, and everything else.
There was a lot of flat due principally to the ornithological dispersal.
Yes, yes.
It's really strictly the ornithological stuff.
Yeah, that's right.
Have you been involved well in talks of the Mulholland, the magic collection?
No, I've not been involved.
Have you heard any scuttlebutt?
No.
I've offered my services, but I've heard no talks about it.
I heard some talk.
Anyway, I just mentioned that as a piece of gossip that I'll pick up out there.
I would say considering the source, it's probably pretty good.
Yes.
Oh, by the way, we do a round during the
The crazy years, and I'm not calling them the crazy years, but the wild years, the reckless years of acquisition... Of ransom.
Of ransom, yeah.
No, I first visited the University of Texas in 1972 and was entertained by the Lawrence scholar, Roberts.
Warren Roberts, who succeeded...
anytime you want to order i'd like to order yeah yes that's good you have a monkfish yes we do um yeah give me a quick biographical uh thing on yourself how long have you been with christie's here in new york how long have you been involved with rare books just so i can have a background i started in the uh rare book business on a holiday job in 1962
Christie's London.
My father, my grandfather, and my great-grandfather were in the Red Book business.
And my grandfather and my father were directors of Pickering and Chateau.
My father died in 1980, and William Reece-Mogg bought Pickering and Chateau in 1981.
My uncle is the only surviving partner left and he lives in retirement in Ireland.
I joined Christie's full time in August 1964 in London, remained with them until March 1975 and I came straight over here.
Been with them now for 27 years.
I started coming over here on business trips from London in 1969, 70, 71, 72, not 73, then in 74.
So I've been in contact with this country steadily for 22 years on business.
And I used to do a lot of business with the dealers every year.
Before we get back to Texas, so you've actually been able to observe for 22 years from this vantage point of the action, so to speak.
I've observed the American action, sure, but not in great detail.
I mean, I was 23 when I first came over here, but I certainly, yeah.
Well, the dealers I was closest to when I came over here were Mike Papantonio.
who was a great, great friend of my father, because they dealt in the same kind of hook.
They had a kind of rapport, and my father represented Seven Gables at Auckland.
I met Bart when I first came over here in 1969.
Mike gave Bart $10 out of the till and said, take Stephen out for a night on the town.
And we went down to the Whitehorse Tavern.
And, you know, he...
That was 69, so I've never brought that long.
Is the action still here?
Or has it really shifted as people... Different kinds of action for different places.
I mean, there's no doubt in my mind of the strength of the London market, for example, for a bullish and aggressive trade in the colour plate market and the...
sort of voyages and travel and yet if you have a focus sail like this DuPont sail or a focus sail like a sail of high spots it's going to do just as well or better in New York because somehow you can pull in
that private money to at least participate in the sale, which wouldn't otherwise go there
to the west end of london part of california as they say not a california something like that but i mean basically new york new york is yeah the californians are wondering why they it doesn't go out there i mean why they don't have auctions yeah because they have so many collectors out there you could certainly have auctions out in california did but did you ever talk to um
did you ever talk to david redden about the demise of sotheby's california no i went to sotheby's california in 72 and i think there was a portfolio of shakespeare sold which mike had sent a bid on and that was one of the i guess that was the last sort of moderately large sale that sotheby's ever held in the book division over there and quite simply
Sotheby's California was closed up as far as I know because it was competing with home base and you can see it I mean if you I mean we just we just laid off 50 people in Glasgow two weeks ago well
You might ask yourself, what the hell were we doing in Glasgow in the first place?
That's a lot of people even have, never mind layoffs.
That's what I'm saying.
What were we doing up there?
But I mean, between 1988 and 1990, you could open anywhere and do it, because you've got the money coming out of your... What happened?
Now everything's tightened up a bit.
You mentioned focus at single owner sales, such as the Manny sale.
Dick Manny is a character of mine, and I do see these people as characters.
He's a creation of yours, is he?
He's a character.
I have characters in this book.
You certainly do.
Because I've been with him, not with him, but I've watched him from the beginning.
I first met Arthur Houghton in 1912 from London and was given his phone number by a colleague of mine in London called Michael Tree and nobody from my firm in London had ever met Arthur Houghton so I rang him up at his New York office
and was told that he was in Maryland and they gave me the Maryland number.
So I phoned Maryland and said, I'd like to come and see him.
He said, I'd love to see you and come on down.
And I went to stay with him and the house was being built on the Eastern Shore.
We had sort of kitchen supper and I stayed over the library and we had a lot of old Fitzgerald way into the night.
And he showed me his...
he showed me his books and we became friendly and I he asked me in 1977 when I'd been over here if I would do an appraisal updating an appraisal done by John Fleming and I said yes I'd love to do it and he said well who would you use to oversee your work and I said well can I share it with Mike Cavantonio and he said yes so Mike and I
Really?
Did an appraisal in the summer of 77.
Then Arthur was very instrumental and helpful in the sale we had at Christie's in 1978 at the General Theological Seminary Gutenberg Bible.
The Freslauer.
on behalf of the Landes Bibliothek in Stuttgart.
And so Arthur... Arthur then in 79 and 80, as Ralph has just said, he sold his collection with us in London.
He wanted to sell the books in London because he's a great Anglophile.
He loved the idea of the books selling well in London and in many ways...
He was right because Quarrett went very strong for the British Library on the things they didn't have.
Barton and I have always thought that probably the 18th and 19th century might have done better over here.
And there were spectacular strengths in all areas, you see.
The reason I say that is because the street assail took place at a time when there was a particular strength in the purchasing power of the institutions.
in this country very important and we don't see that now
And I think you'd find that Clarence Wolfe and Bill Rees would have to work awfully hard for another Street of Sale coming up in the 90s, but they've got to sell the stuff on.
That's a very interesting point.
Whereas the gardeners, Doheny and Martin had this amazing range.
And there were high spots.
Lots of high spots, which appealed to people like Dick Manning.
He's now selling his books next month.
Yeah, I don't think you can compare.
Yeah, I know what you mean, but I think the garden sale had a certain... It didn't have as much age as you really want, but it had a certain age to it.
Haven had been around buying since 1976.
And then it gets sold in 1989.
That's 13 years.
And the books were impeccably chosen.
And they were superb.
That we did lose in straight combat to Sotheby's.
Well, you must expect that that's on my agenda to talk about today.
I've been through the docket of the civil case in Massachusetts.
Oh, that's right.
You mentioned that at the opening.
And quite clearly, the stuff had gone to Christie's first.
Not as material, but you did an appraisal on that.
No.
Let's backtrack.
A lawyer for Michael Davis came to New York without identifying the name of his client at first but saying he represented the Garden Limited or a partner in the Garden Limited rather and that they were looking for an appraisal prior to
the dissolution of this partnership, which might require, at some stage, a sale of... And this particular lawyer was exploring various angles about who should do an appraisal.
And he came to us
amongst other people.
And we had worked with Steve Weissman down valuing the Pforzheimer Library down at the University of Texas.
Bart, Steve and I had done that work together.
And so we thought it was a sensible idea to field a sort of international team again.
So we had Felix from Lathrop Harper, Felix Hoyens, to help us with incunables.
We had...
Steve on English Literature, we had Bart, consultant in-house, then Chris Cooper for autographed manuscripts, and myself.
Well, let me explain.
We proposed this at the same time very much aware that
that we were involving ourselves, and we knew, we said, heavens above, maybe we're backing the wrong horse here.
But on the other hand... Then we wouldn't know what you mean.
Well, by that, we didn't know if we valued a collection for Michael Davis.
Had you ever heard of Michael Davis before?
No, but we then heard about him pretty quickly.
Prior to that, your understanding was that the garden was haven no more.
No, I mean, the garden was haven no more.
There'd been constant speculation as to how he bought it.
because he actually got to know Arthur Houghton and thought he was a little crazy.
He got to know Arthur Houghton?
Yes, because Houghton was the principal buyer at Arthur Houghton's sale.
Houghton swept whatever he wanted from Houghton.
That's what made the garden sale so magnificent.
to those open coffees coming back again, and other things that Haven had put in as well.
As a result of that, he got to meet Arthur.
He got to meet Arthur.
He went down to meet Arthur, yeah.
Would you say that that made Haven a major book collector in everyone's eyes?
What do you mean?
Well, in terms of stature.
Statue is very important.
But what did what make him?
That the Holtonson, his success, his triumph at the Holtonson.
Was that basically, in your estimation, his coming out, the emergence as a major collector on the international scene?
He was a major collector, he had major potential before, great potential, and he was a great buyer before.
George Laurie describes him as a common...
A comet that flashes across the sky.
That's his metaphor.
I think George Lowry is incorrect.
Comet takes a long time.
I think he meant meteor, but basically he said comet.
Well, basically, flash across the sky.
Nobody knows where he comes from, but he's a major player to be taken seriously.
Well, people...
But you said you think he's wrong on that.
Well, what I'm trying to say is that his span,
His span was not terribly long-lived, but his span wasn't like Manny's span.
Manny's more like a sort of old-fashioned mortar attacking a town that just comes up and clocks down.
But in the case of Haven O'Moore,
He bought, for example, the Dove's Press Bible envelope, one of three copies known.
He bought that in 1977.
He was a big collector before.
Cotin must have certainly put a stamp on his collection, yes.
But then other things he bought afterwards.
The Yates notebook, this kind of thing.
All these things made him into a...
into a great collector dominating the scene for a much longer period of time than somebody like Manny or George Abrams.
Well of course Manny is selling his stuff by choice.
Haven's quote, I can't tell you where I got the quote, but he wrote to this person,
He said, they are forcing me to sell my children into slavery.
He did not want to disclose of this collection.
No, I know that.
But in Matty's case, he is choosing to sell his books because he thinks he can get close to full value for them.
That's why he's not selling any of his art.
That's what he told me a couple weeks ago at lunch.
I don't mean to jump around the block here.
We're losing our focus.
Well, anyway, concerning Haven, let's concentrate on Haven.
The chronology of this is then that
Let's not neglect his meeting with Arthur Houghton.
I thought he was a little bad, you said.
Yeah.
I thought he was not the sort of person... Arthur Houghton found him insufferable.
As a show-off.
And slightly crazy in terms of where he was coming from.
which was an air of mystery that Haven always liked to cultivate.
But to go back to our involvement with Haven, we undertook to do the appraisal.
And after that, we were then told that...
our appraisal was going to be accepted as value by both parties.
That's what we'd hoped was going to happen, but we didn't know at the outset.
We agreed to do an appraisal for Michael Davis, but eventually Haven agreed that that appraisal would occur because we also knew that
If Michael Babis had chosen to go ahead with our appraisal and Haven had argued it, he would have then actually got his own appraisal.
And probably that appraisal would have been handled by somebody like Quaritch in London.
Probably.
I'm not sure about that.
And they would have been close in any case, I think.
The appraisal would have been.
I haven't any idea.
I can't say, because you don't know what another appraisal is going to be.
Yeah.
Well, his value is value, I think.
No, I don't think so.
One person values things different from another.
Well, I tell you, do you know what we valued the garden collection at?
I'd say ten million.
Nine.
And we went... We competed very strongly for it.
Why do you think it went to some...
They wrote a large check.
They wrote a large check in advance.
And we went in with our usual pre-1989 argument that if you have a capital involvement in the goods that you sell,
it's potentially damaging to the sale.
And we made this argument, we brought Lord Carrington over, and I was
for this particular marriage?
For this proposal?
Absolutely.
We stayed in Boston together.
Me, my colleague Stephen Lash and Lawrence Harrington.
And we went in.
We were well received by a battery of about 13 lawyers.
From both sides?
From both sides.
From both sides, yeah.
There was a big meeting.
Was Haven and Michael there?
No.
Neither client was there.
And we went in.
At one time, and Sotheby's went in at another.
This all would have been around 88, 89?
No, it was around... No.
Yes, you're right.
It was.
It was June or July.
That's right.
It was June or July 89.
You're absolutely right.
And also...
And I phoned up Bob Pirrie to give him the news.
I heard the news when I was in Vermont.
I was stunned by the news because it seemed to me that the only people that
Sotheby's were sucking it to with a martin second.
They were shooting martins in the foot by having gardened.
And the martinsale, no it came at the beginning.
The martinsale was damaging to the
The Martinsale was damaged by the Gardner prices.
Why do you say that?
Why do I say that?
Did they offer competing things, competitive types of things?
Well, you attended those sales, didn't you?
I did, but I mean... Did you look at the cattle then?
I have all the catalogs.
Well, if you look at the catalogs, you see there was a lot of duplication.
I think part of the deal with the court was you had to think, I think they had to sell when they did.
I don't think there was any choice.
Yeah, I agree.
So therefore, I'm saying, well, I understand, but we could certainly compete with him.
Couldn't we?
because we weren't holding them together.
Yeah, that's right.
But they were lured in, the lawyers were lured in by a large cheque, which showed... A cheque means what?
This is a guarantee against... No, not a guarantee.
No, just an advance of money, yes.
How much did you... Have you heard that it... I heard it was $4.5 million, half the appraisal.
Not bad.
Were you prepared to give any advance at all?
If we'd been asked to, we wouldn't have been referred to, but we went out of the starting blocks advising against it.
You see?
Which was our policy, which was our policy prior to 1989.
It was company policy.
I'm not saying that there have not been exceptions prior to 1989.
When we've not given an answer, I'm not saying that at all.
What I'm saying is that we have always done second to our competitors when it came to inventive money matters.
And it's no coincidence, therefore,
that we were not approached by Richard Manning for the sale of these things and also I have heard from someone that he still owes money on the failure.
It is now Tuesday the 24th of September.
Why haven't we seen a catalogue of the Manning sale yet?
You know, it hasn't been in the New York Times.
Do you think it might be something to do with the estimates?
I don't know.
I've asked, and I intend, when we're done, by the way, to even take a ride over there, just to stop in and say hello.
The proofs have been out for a long time.
Yeah, I don't know.
I wonder if, when you said to me earlier on that, when you said to me earlier on today that he believes...
that he's selling, that you believe he's selling books because he's not touching his art because he thinks he's going to get near to full value.
That's what he said.
Well, I'm saying that's your quote.
Well, one wonders therefore where the estimates will be fixed.
That's what Martin Balber Irish is.
It's all in the newspapers.
I believe, by the way, that he owes them a hell of a lot more than 1.1 million.
Well, that's what one would understand.
I read the transcript very carefully and... He's your man who would know because Ralph's forte and the man with him deemed failing.
they're involved in american furniture and i believe that richard manny's biggest passion after books or conjunct or is well is american furniture um and he's not selling any of the art he's not selling any of the furniture and he maintains because he said he would if he thought if he could get full value has he sold his house his house is for sale he hasn't sold it
I'm invited to go down there and look at the empty shelves, which I will do shortly.
It says the house is 30,000 square feet.
I can't imagine.
That's what Jim Cummins told me.
I can't imagine a 30,000.
In Irvington on Hudson.
Well, he said to me,
Don't forget, we're selling on November the 27th in London.
A copy of the 36-line Bible.
And the last time a copy of that book came up for sale was 1789.
There's no copy in this country.
There are 13 copies known in the world, including this one.
as opposed to 48 copies known of the Gutenberg, and 21 copies of the Gutenberg known of Hertha.
This copy of the book is a fragment of two-thirds of the book, B-36 as we call it, but the interesting thing is the last copy to come up, which is owned this particular piece or part of it, at the Pinelli sale in 1789.
So therefore, E-A-N-E-L-L-I, so therefore Brinley couldn't have it,
Morgan couldn't have it.
Ho couldn't have it.
And Huntingdon couldn't have it.
Isn't that wonderful?
I was worth going to England for, isn't it?
Well, it's a very... In pure bibliophile terms, it's a real landmark, because none of those people... We didn't enjoy it.
Thank you.
And...
It was a wonderful reduction, wasn't it?
The reduction of the... We have coffee or something?
We're talking about Salem in London on the 27th.
Yeah, that's the November of the 27th.
Well, I mean, that's the really big thing that you know.
What I...
In May 1977, Christy's book was happening in New York, came out of the sharding blocks, where the world record price had auctioned for a printed book, $320,000.
for Audubon's Birds of America.
In November 1977, we beat our own world record with another copy of Audubon's Birds of America for $360,000.
And then in April 1978, we afflicted them all with a copy of the Gutenberg Bible from the General Theological Seminary.
It made $2 million.
All these are hammer prices.
At that time, nothing printed exceeded the price of $404,000.
Paid for the Corn Leary Declaration of Independence at Freemans in 1969.
And I was tickering around with reserve prices of $1.5 million.
which nobody had ever done before.
Then we held that world record until October the 22nd, 1987, when we beat it twice in the same sale with the Dahini Volume 1, Gutenberg 5.
and with a block that made 2.2 million.
Are these world records important?
Only in as much as some people like to hear.
I don't think there's anybody around now
with the same stature as a collector of, say, Robert Ho or J.P.
Morgan.
These have all basically been on your watch, I would say, right?
I'm sorry?
All of these great sales have basically come on your watch.
Yes, the ones I just mentioned.
Sure, they have, and that's important, I think.
And also, I feel very fortunate to have been able to handle two Gutenberg Bibles and the sale of them.
Did you have any, speaking of two Gutenbergs, one of which was the Doheny,
uh did you have any this is this is a one of these serendipitous questions but any dealings with the uh with the church in la on this did they ever give any indication of why they were selling the library yeah i mean yeah yeah well yeah they gave indications so they they the sale was handled by somebody called jerry lynch
He's a monsignor, I think.
No, Gerry Lynch has nothing to do with the church whatsoever.
He used to work for Ford, the Ford who died recently.
Ford who was with Sotheby's as an advisor.
Remember, what was the man's name?
The famous Ford.
The head of the Ford Motor Company.
Oh, Henry.
Henry Ford, that's right.
Henry Ford.
He used to work for Henry Ford.
That's right.
Jerry Lynch would now be over 90, and he's a pillar of the church in the sense that he's a layman who's a great developed Catholic, but he's very much a businessman.
Jerry Lynch, in one week, in 1986, made two telephone calls.
One was to Christie's LA and the other was to Sutherland's LA.
And he spoke to a girl called Hilary Holland in our LA office.
And in 1985...
When I was out in L.A.
with the Bibliophiles, the International Bibliophiles, Hillary had just started there from New York.
And I said, look, you know, do you ever hear from Doheny and Trump?
Do you ever hear from Doheny and Trump?
And Jerry Lynch just called up and he said, out of the woodwind.
Yeah, he just said, my name's Gerald Lynch, the expert firm.
And I'm an advisor to the Archdiocese of Los Angeles, and I'm handling the sales of the Bohemian treasure, the library and everything else.
And I want you to come down to my office to see me.
And she froze a flash and everything else inside.
I was in Germany in 86.
She called her boss, Stephen Lash, in...
New York, and he said, why don't you postpone that jewellery appointment that you've got to do, and go see this guy.
And Sotheby's were equally on the ball as well.
And the thing started just like that.
And what had happened was around the wall of the treasure room,
in the seminary was a remington mural that should be removed from chester place where she used to live because she moved out of chester moved the things out of chester place when she gave them to the church and the big library was put up the top floor of the library two-story building was the treasure room there was a mural by remington around the wall
In 1985, I noticed a talk to Tom Langer of the Huntington.
When I was up there with the Woodley class, I said, Tom, what's with the mural?
It was a colour photograph by this time.
You know, just like those photographs in the Hyde rooms at Harvard, you know, photographs of masters.
You could tell if it was a photograph if you were.
Look carefully.
What had happened was that they had it insured for $4 million.
The church was offered some sum of money, I forget which.
They were about to sell the thing for the sum of money offered.
And Jerry Lynch just stayed.
Stay on.
Why don't you let me ask for double?
And you know what happened?
They get it.
He did and they got it.
And that's why he made the call.
And there was no...
Jerry was not a paid person.
Jerry, I'm sure, he's a senior man.
A very senior man.
And he's very, very devout.
He's a widower, but I think he may have married again.
He lives in L.A.?
?
And Gerald Lynch.
Gerald Lynch.
You never know, do you?
Gerald Lynch, you can ask Bart about him.
We all know him.
You never know what you can get with a book.
He's great.
Gerald Lynch is great.
And anyway, the thing was that he basically, he ground us to peace.
Well, did he demand up front money the way he did?
No, no, no.
He put everything.
Everything.
We could have offered him up for our money.
We could have done everything.
It was just down, down in the dirt, competition.
Just competition.
Well, you must take terrific pride in the fact that you beat out Selfies.
That must be in the police.
Yes, but I'll tell you something, in hindsight.
This is where competition doesn't help you.
What would have been better?
would have been, if we'd have sold what we normally sell, what we normally do best, and I can honestly say the same for Sotheby's New York too.
Sotheby's New York and Christie's New York.
do not generally sell tons of books in lots.
And when Sotheby's does it, it's pretty disastrous.
Because basically their buyers don't expect that.
What we should have done with Doheny where there were tons and tons and tons of cheap books, we should have had those in a secondary auction house.
But when you're competing with somebody like Gerry, this is not something you can tell him.
Because the other side says, oh, Christie's doesn't want it all.
Wouldn't you love to have it?
Yeah, but do you think you'd earn more money in that the other way?
I mean, you did close to $40 million on that.
I think...
I think the church would have made more money.
They really did.
Yes.
Because all those items that we sold in the Camarillo sale, and we had basically three cattlemen.
But if I can describe them for a second.
No, forget that one.
Just talking books.
We have three catalogues which have total focus.
The catalog one of Infunibus, the catalog two of manuscripts that we held in Alvin, and the last catalog was William Morris.
If you examine catalogs, you'll find a magnificent thing.
But adding to those things was a real sort of cement around the ankles.
Tons and tons of bulk.
And the tons and tons of bulk costs us time and money, and we bundled it up into great big lumps.
And basically, a lesser auction house such as Square, or Christie's South Kensington, or a local auction area there, could have sold those things as individual books.
I mean, hey, you walk into South of East or Christie's this afternoon with a $1,500 book and see what you get.
Do you know what you're going to get?
Sorry.
That's right.
Which brings me back to... I mean, you look at what it costs.
I look at all the personnel in there and I see this.
Can I ask you another one?
Can you lend me $1,500 now?
Well, exactly.
It's the sum of money, isn't it?
I can't lend you $1,500 either.
It's a large sum of money.
And if you talk to the person down the road where you live, or I talk to somebody in Hawaii where my daughter aged 11 lives, or I talk to my daughter aged 11 about $1,500, it is a tensile sum of money.
And we are now at the stage in our lives when Christie's and Santa Claus say $2.500, which is a strange state of affairs, which brings me back
in a nice little circle about this very matter.
That is why the garden sale is a greater sale than Street, than Doheny, than Martin.
It's greater for all points of view.
You get it in July, you sell it in November.
You smile.
You get Martin,
That's what they must have had with Martin.
And also 314 watts.
That's all we're talking.
They did it on Thursday night, three sessions.
One, two, three, in and out.
One catalog.
One catalog run.
Clean.
Fast and clean, right?
The best.
Nice.
Hope magnificent collection.
few things few things not so good haven didn't buy those people for good stuff um how well did you get to know hey very well is there something you can talk to me about job and all well you know you can go as far as private you can go as far as you think prudent no i mean
How did you get to know him?
That's how I got to know him.
I got to know him.
It's a very good story.
We had... I've heard of him.
We had the General Theological Seminary Gutenberg Bible on view at Christie's.
As you know, with Christie's viewings, we have a label in every copy of the catalogue, viewings by appointment only.
And I got a phone call somewhere around about 11 o'clock that there was a man downstairs demanding
not asking, demanding, to see the Gutenberg Bible.
I love people like that.
I used to love them more than I love them now.
I'm a bit soft.
I was tough when I was 32.
I said, oh, he's demanding.
He said, well, I'd love to go and see him.
And here was this man, very neatly dressed, on his own,
and he wheeled around at me and said
I want to see this book, and I said, I'm sorry, you can't see this book without an appointment.
He said, do you know who I am?
And I said, no, I haven't got the slightest idea, but I'm Stephen Massey, and I'm pleased to meet you.
And he said, I am Abraham Moore, and I said, well, as I just said, I'm Stephen Massey, and I'm pleased to meet you.
Have you anything else to say?
Have you heard of him prior to that?
Of course I've heard of him.
And if the book's good enough, they come back, they crawl.
Unless they're foolish.
But if they really want the book, they play by the rules.
So we've got friends.
We became friendly.
But he didn't buy it, did he?
No, he did not buy it.
Was he in it?
I think he meant it.
Did he buy it by himself or did he use an agent?
What do you mean?
Well, did he use...
an agent to buy for him at these sales?
Did he buy... No, he always used an agent.
I mean, he'd often be with the agent.
He was with Warren Howell at the sale.
He was with Warren Howell at the General Theological Seminary sale.
He was with Warren Howell, and Warren Howell was the underbidder.
Warren was the underbidder of the sale.
Now, whether that means, I don't know.
We don't know that.
Warren is now deceased.
Warren is deceased.
Yeah.
Would you say that, don't I breathe a sigh of relief, that the Gartenstale didn't have a Gutenberg rival.
Two vols.
Complete.
Don't I breathe a sigh of relief.
Then, you would have had one more lap, and it would have made 31 million.
Why not?
Fifteen?
More?
Do you have fifteen for them?
Well, they went sixteen for the day.
Sixteen.
Do you buy books?
Yes.
Got any books in two bowls?
I think it's the same.
What I'm saying is if you've got a book in two bowls that costs you five thousand dollars, how much would you pay for volume one of them?
If you buy it at all.
There's no way out.
The Doheny Vol.
1 was the finest copy of Vol.
1 you'd ever see.
But would you buy Vol.
1 of Gulliver's Travel?
Large paper, pristine, uncut.
I know of such a copy.
My father used to have it.
But it's Vol.
1.
No wonder my father still had it.
never sold it, just a nice object.
But what's it worth?
Is it worth Manny's
Two volumes that hung around for a long time at Harry Levenson and at Quarrett and was bought at the Sion College sale in 77.
I'm not giving you an estimate of 15 million on the garden sale, but in the garden sale... In the garden sale, prices the way they were, perfect Gutenberg Bible, that night, what do you think?
And people were of a mind to spend money.
They were spending money that night.
It was quite a night, wasn't it?
Manny himself spent... Thank you.
No?
Not for me.
No.
Manny himself spent... Over...
two times the value on a book that wasn't worth half.
2.1 million of work that Shakespeare, not even in their original bindings.
I mean, I saw the Shakespeare... We weren't kidding around.
We had Steve, Felix, myself, Bart.
We had some fairly decent minds on that appraisal.
And we came in at $400,000 on the set.
What were they paid once the $265,000?
Well, yeah.
They gave the pros.
$200,000.
$200,000, yeah.
My memory of it.
We reckoned it at $400,000.
It certainly was... All the money's on volume one.
Of course.
We all know that.
The last copy up was the Webster copy, which was a damn good copy.
Mags underbid it.
Fleming buys it and sends it to Japan.
And, of course, there's new levels.
We know there are new levels, but it's not.
It's not a $2 million set.
However... Who is the underbidder, though?
Who is an underbidder?
Small, I think.
Small, in Washington.
Really?
I think so, yeah.
I mean, doesn't that surprise you?
It's not a $2 million set yet.
There's an underbidder who pushes it into $2 million.
But Small's an autograph collector.
He's never bothered to get any sound advice except from an auction house about what he buys.
I mean, do you think Small will be in this time?
I haven't got any idea.
Depends who's advising him.
If he's advised by Sotheby's, he'd better be there.
Small was said to be the other bit around these things.
I think you could say that Small is almost certainly the underbidder.
Really?
Yeah.
Why would he be going after the folios all of a sudden if he was not a red folios?
Because he bought a declaration of independence?
So he's collecting a housewife's big tag.
I have no idea.
I don't know.
But I know he's got a declaration of independence.
I'm almost certain that he was the underbidder on the set of folios.
And I do know that he bought a set of signers.
So I know he collects autographs.
Let's get back to Hayden.
You get to know him pretty well.
Very well, I know.
You get to be a social...
kind of a thing, come over for dinner, I guess.
No, we never actually had dinner at my apartment.
No.
You're smiling.
Well, you know why I'm smiling, and I'm not going to say.
If I were to report that, would I be in error?
Report what?
What I report about the groupings at your apartment.
Who was there?
A number of people.
Who?
You tell me.
You tell me who was there.
I don't know.
I can't tell you.
You can't tell me who was there.
No.
Why not?
You can't tell me.
Well, if you don't know, then how... How many sources?
Two, sir.
Well, one of your sources was Bach.
Because he told so.
But... I would never say... But who was the other source?
Because the thing is that... I know exactly who was there.
Well, I can comment if you let me know who else was there.
Because the fact is that I know exactly who was there.
And I need to... Was that my father that evening?
Yeah, I'd love to.
Okay, fine.
There was Haven and Moore.
There was my wife.
There was Fanny Neville Rose.
And there was Stephen Manson.
That's it.
And Bob.
How the hell does the story get around?
Because it's the book tray.
Turn this thing on.
You said you were very fond of me.
I was very fond of Haven.
I used to see him when he came to New York at fairly frequent intervals.
I'd have lunch with him on his own or with him and with Laurier.
And...
I was upset when he told me his decision that he wanted to sell anyway, that he had to sell.
Did he tell you he had to sell or he wanted to sell?
No, he didn't tell me in so many words, but it was obvious to me that something was up when he expressed some interest in the Doheny one sale.
It was mild interest, and he didn't buy anything.
And I understood that he dropped from sight for a while.
And I and Bart and a number of people wondered what was going on.
Wondered if anything would happen.
We used to sort of joke when the phone rang.
We'd say, hey, it's probably Heyman.
Have you heard from him in the Ralsons Groups?
Yes.
recently or no not recently i i uh he he made a telephone call to me um soon after the sale i've forgotten exactly when um and i saw him at the southerby sale
and he gave me a sort of cordial phone call and he understood how disappointed I was not getting the collection for sale and he asked me on my comments about the sale itself and I said that his modern press books were
They didn't perform well, which they obviously didn't.
But everything else was giant.
Did he ever talk to you about his... Did he think he was the great collector of... The great collector alive, as he told William Shady, I'm the greatest collector of... That's why Shady was... That's what Arthur Houghton found insufferable.
When I said insufferable, that's what Arthur Houghton found insufferable.
Because actually...
As a single collector, Arthur Houghton was far greater.
Bartman should have mentioned this to you, because in terms of range, Arthur Houghton had a Gooseberg Bible, which he bought and sold.
He had the greatest collection of Alice in Wonderland put together in recent times since Eldridge Johnson.
He had a magnificent icebox all bought from...